
In this video, we will make use of the two results presented
in the previous video in order to identify
the corresponding discrete time transition
matrix for a continuous time model.
We will do this both for a general linear system
as well as for two important examples
of the translational motion model--
the constant velocity model and the constant acceleration
model.
We will start by looking at a general solution
for linear systems.
Suppose the continuous time motion is described
by this linear differential equation where A tilde here
is a constant matrix and q tilde of t is a noise process.
How should we then select the transition matrix A k minus 1
in this discrete time motion model where
we have x k equal to A k minus 1 times x k minus 1
plus some noise?
Well, we have two options.
We could either use the Euler method to approximate x of t
plus capital T as x of t plus t times the derivative of x of t.
We should note here that x of t plus capital T
corresponds to x k and that x of t corresponds to x k minus 1.
So all we need to do is to look at this equation
and identify the matrices that we multiply x of t with.
And that will give us A k minus 1, our transition matrix.
In this case, we have x of t here,
which is multiplied with an identity matrix.
So we have I here times x of t and then we have x of t
here, which is multiplied by t times A tilde.
So our transition matrix for the discrete time system
A k minus 1 is then I, the identity matrix,
plus t times A tilde where A tilde here
is our transition matrix for the continuous time system.
Another alternative is to make use of the exact solution
for x of t plus capital T that we also
derived in the previous video.
According to that expression, x of t plus capital T
is equal to e to the power of A tilde times t times
x of t plus this integral here, which
does not depend on x of t.
If we again recall that x of t plus capital T
corresponds to x k and that x of t corresponds to x k minus 1,
then we can simply compare these two equations to conclude
that our transition matrix, A k minus 1,
is equal to e to the power of capital T times
A tilde, which is this factor here in front of x of t.
If we compare the two solutions, the Euler method
and the exact solution, we can see that the Euler method
actually corresponds to the Taylor
expansion of the exact solution if we only
include the first two terms.
I would also like to point out that normally it's better
to use the exact solution than the Euler method,
but I think the comparison is interesting since the Euler
method is easier to apply, especially
for non-linear systems.
Now, given these solutions for a general linear system,
let's make use of this in order to compute a transition
matrix in two examples.
We start by looking at the so-called constant velocity
model, CV model.
Here we assume that we have a position state, denoted p of t,
and the velocity state, denoted v of t.
Ignoring the noise component, it is
assumed that the time derivative of the position state
is the velocity and that the time derivative of the velocity
is 0.
That is, we assume that the velocity is
constant and, hence, its name.
If we write this on a matrix form, we have the following.
So we have time derivative of our state, which
we denote that x dot of t equal to this vector
here, which is then equal to a matrix
A tilde times x of t, which is this vector here
plus some noise.
If we ignore the noise term here for awhile
and focus on this deterministic part of the model--
if we look at the first element of x of t, which is p of t,
we have that p dot of t, which is the time derivative of p,
is equal to 0 times p of t plus 1 times v of t.
So, unsurprisingly, we're saying that the time
derivative of the position is the velocity.
Similarly, if we look at the time derivative of v of t,
we're saying that it's 0 times p of t plus 0
times v of t, which is 0.
So we are saying that the derivative of the velocity
is 0, which is exactly what we wanted.
So according to this deterministic part
of the model, the velocity can never change.
That is, it is constant as the name suggests.
Now, that's not a very realistic nor useful model.
To allow for the state to deviate a bit from this,
we add this noise term here, which typically-- actually only
affects the velocity term here.
That is, it's common to assume that q tilde of t
here is actually a scalar noise process that
can be written like this where q c of t
is a scalar white noise process.
Now, with this added noise term here,
we are actually saying that the velocity's nearly constant
and that changes in the velocity is, more or less, this 0 mean
random noise process.
To the right, we have an illustration of one realization
of this model.
And you can see that the velocity here
is changing slowly and, more or less,
randomly at each time instance here.
We can see that the position state is then
the integration of this.
And we can see that it can, more or less,
be described using piecewise linear segments like this.
So that is segments where the velocity is constant
as the model suggests.
Now, could you think of a situation
where it would be reasonable to use this model?
One example that I think about is
if we want to model a vehicle cruising on a highway,
for example.
In this case, the vehicle is keeping a fairly constant speed
and not making too complicated maneuvers, which
would match pretty good with the modeling assumptions
that we have here.
Even though we are discussing this model in terms of position
and velocity, this model is not restricted
to be used in a positioning problem.
It is, in fact, suitable to use this model in any context
where we have some underlying trend in our states--
that we have this linear changing in our states,
some trend here that we wish to capture.
As you will see later, this could, for example,
be a drift in our sensor that we wish to compensate for.
So this type of model has many uses.
So now we know all about the continuous time
constant velocity model.
Our objective here is to find a transition matrix, A k minus 1,
for the discrete time constant velocity model.
From the previous video, we know two ways of doing this.
We have the Euler method and the exact analytical solution.
Finding the solution to the Euler approximation is simple.
We just plug-in A tilde into this equation here.
So we have the identity matrix plus t times A tilde.
So we have the identity matrix here plus t times this A
tilde here and we get this transition matrix here.
Furthermore, finding the exact solution is also trivial.
If we plug-in A tilde in this expression here,
which we can express by this sequence here--
so if we evaluate each term in the sequence,
we have the identity matrix plus A tilde times t,
which is what we got up here.
Now, the third term here, we have A tilde squared,
which happens to be a 0 matrix.
So if we multiply A tilde with itself, we get all 0s out.
And if A tilde squared is 0, then
all the higher order terms here are also 0.
So we simply get this result here,
which is this matrix here.
So what we can see here is that this is actually the same
as that we got with the Euler method.
So both methods gives us the same result. Now,
we can understand this mathematically
as the secondary term or higher are 0,
but we also think about it more intuitively by considering
the approximation that the Euler method does--
namely that it approximates the time derivative as constant
between two sample times.
Now, in this case, that's actually not an approximation.
Because if you look at this, the time derivative of the position
is 0 times v where this is actually constant.
So this part here is just a constant,
which is why the Euler method is the same as the exact solution.
So the deterministic part of the discrete time model
says that the position at time k is just
a previous position plus t times previous velocity, which
makes sense.
And the velocity is just 0 times the position plus 1 times
the previous velocity.
So the new velocity is just the old velocity.
So the resulting discrete time constant velocity model
looks like this.

So we have the position at the current time
is equal to the position at the previous time plus t times
the velocity, which makes sense.
And the velocity at time k is simply the previous velocity,
so it's constant.
We will in later lectures also discuss
how we can describe our discrete time noise process q k minus 1,
but in this lecture we focus on the transition matrix.
Another important example of a translational motion model
is the constant acceleration model, or CA model.
It resembles the constant velocity model,
but, in this case, the state vector
contains both a position, a velocity, and an acceleration
state.
The time derivative of the position is the velocity.
But now that the acceleration is in the state vector,
the time derivative of the velocity
is assumed to be the acceleration.
Whereas, the time derivative of the acceleration
is instead assumed to be 0 plus some noise.
We can write this on a matrix form like this.
And if you multiply this together,
you can verify that what I just said holds.
So the interpretation of this deterministic part
of this model is instead that the acceleration is constant.
Now, to allow for deviations from this, we add this noise
term here, which is, again, often assumed
to be a scalar white noise process, which
we can write like this where q c of t
is a scalar 0 mean random noise process that is saying
that the acceleration is nearly constant
and that the changes in the acceleration
is modeled according to this noise process q c of t.
To the right here, we have an illustration of one realization
using this model.
We see that the acceleration is allowed to change slowly
and that the changes are, more or less, random.
The velocity and position states are then
the first and second order integration
of the acceleration.
The velocity now changes, more or less, linearly
and that the position now then changes,
more or less, quadratically as a function of time.
So when should we use this model?
Well, compared to the constant velocity model,
which could be applicable in highway scenarios
at cruising speeds, the constant acceleration model
would be better suited for when the vehicle's
entering the highway and accelerating up
to the speed on the highway.
So now that we know the continuous time
constant acceleration model, how should we
select a transition matrix, A k minus 1,
in our discretized version of us?
Now, finding the Euler approximation for this system
is, again, trivial.
We plug-in A tilde into this equation here, so A k minus 1
is the identity matrix plus t times A tilde, which
becomes this matrix here because the identity matrix has
all 1s on the diagonal and A tilde has these 1s here,
so t times A tilde becomes these two off diagonal elements.
So if we try to interpret this discrete time model,
we see that the current position is
the previous position plus capital
T times the previous velocity.
But the acceleration state does not come into play here.
For the velocity, however, we see that the current velocity
is the previous velocity plus t times
the previous acceleration.
Now, let's compare this to what we
get using the exact solution.
Now, if we solve the problem using the exact solution
instead, we get this Taylor series expansion of e
to the power A tilde time capital T.
So we have the identity matrix plus A tilde times capital
T plus A tilde squared capital T squared over 2 and so on.
For this example, it turns out that all these three
are non-zero, whereas A tilde to the power of 3 and up are zero.
What happens is that this term here adds this element here,
t squared over 2, which tells us that acceleration can also
have an impact on our position, which is reasonable.
We integrate acceleration twice to get
an adjustment of our position.
If we compare to what we get for the Euler method,
then this term here is not present.
This is 0 here.
So normally this is the transition matrix
that we recommend that you use, if you
like to use a constant acceleration model.
But it's interesting to see the difference in the results
as we tend to use the Euler method for when
we have nonlinear models.
So, in this case, we see that there
is a difference between the exact solution and the solution
that we get with the Euler method.
We can generalize the constant velocity
and constant acceleration models that we just
seen to higher dimensions.
If we assume that the motion in the different dimensions
are independent, this generalization
is essentially trivial.
If we do it for the constant velocity model,
we can stack all the position states in the beginning
and then afterwards have all the velocities states
in the different dimensions.
A tilde, for the continuous time system,
looks like this where I n is the identity matrix of dimension n
and these 0s are assumed to be 0 matrices of dimension
n times n.
If we plug this A tilde into the exact discretization
model or the Euler approximation,
we get this time discrete transition matrix.
So it has the same form as we saw before,
but everything here has been replaced by matrices.
Now, we can do a similar thing for the constant acceleration
model and we get this result here for the exact method.
And we can also generalize this to arbitrary many dimensions,
but normally we only do this for two or three dimensions.
Here is a self-assessment question
to find out if you can find the discrete time transition matrix
for this continuous time model.
