
So now we know a bit about what to look
for when we are assessing if our filter is functioning properly.
Now it's time to get some basic intuition of how
we can tune our filter in order to get
it working as good as possible.
What we typically mean by tuning in this case
is to make smaller adjustments to our model parameters, mainly
the process and measurement noise covariances,
and then to evaluate the performance of a filter,
using see a combination of the measures
that we presented earlier.
To be honest, when developing a filter,
this is perhaps the most difficult part,
where we spend much of our development time.
To get a feeling for what's happening
when we are adjusting our noise parameters,
let's look at a toy example.
We want to estimate the position of a vehicle using
some positioning measurements from some generic sensor.
To do this, we need two models, a motion model,
describing how the vehicle moves, and a measurement model,
describing the relationship between the state
and our observations.
And in the Kalman filter setting, both of these models
are Gaussian models, like this.
And where the parameter that we typically want to tune
is the process noise covariance and the measurement noise
covariance.
If we start with the process model, in this example,
the purpose of this model is to give a probabilistic model
of the position of the vehicle at the current time,
k, given that we knew its position at the time before.
The Kalman filter setting, again, we
described this as a Gaussian density of this mean here
and this covariance.
So if we look at this for our example,
the motion model here will describe
where we expect the vehicle to be using the deterministic part
of the model.
And then we have the process noise covariance,
which will model how much we think the vehicle can possibly
deviate from this expectation.
So we know the state at the previous time instance.
This is deterministic.
We know this, as we condition on it in the model.
Then the model describes where we expect the vehicle to be.
So this perhaps here, this is then the deterministic function
of our previous state.
And then we have some uncertainty
around this point, which is then related
to our covariance, qk minus 1.
Typically, these deviations described by qk minus 1
are the result of a change in behavior
between the consecutive time instances
by, for example, accelerating, braking, or steering,
in this case.
The goal here is to choose q such
that the motion model captures how
likely different maneuvers are.
The measurement model, on the other hand,
we want to describe the stochastic relation
between the state at the current time
and the current observation yk.
Again, in a Kalman filter case, we describe this as a Gaussian,
with a mean that describes where we expect the observation to be
and the covariance rk, which models
are measurement uncertainty.
This uncertainty should capture both our modeling uncertainty
that comes from making simplifications
in this part of the model and pure measurement
noise in the sensor itself.
That comes from thermal noise or other noise sources
specific to that sensor type.
And information about this type of sensor noise,
thermal noise and other sources, can typically
be found in the data sheet from the sensor manufacturer.
So given that we know where the vehicle is,
this is xk, we condition on this,
we want to describe a probabilistic model
for where we expect the measurements to end up.
Let's say that, in this case, we were measuring
the front of the vehicle here.
So this would be xk.
times xk.
And then we have some uncertainty ellipse
around this, which then is described by rk.
And then we expect our observations
to fall within this region here.
So we will generate measurements for this.
We would expect them to look something like this.
So now let's look at our example of how a Kalman
filter can behave for different choices of our noise
parameters.
In this example, we want to estimate
the position of this vehicle using these noisy observations.
Note that we have illustrated all the observations here.
But the filter will only consider them one at a time.
In the first scenario, we have chosen the process noise
covariance, qk minus 1, to be much too small
and will not allow our estimated state
to deviate from our deterministic prediction.
And in this case, our deterministic prediction
assumes that we are just going straight.
As we see, the filter more or less
ignores the observations as it believes
them to be less reliable than our motion model.
If we instead choose a too small measurement
noise covariance, rk, this will mean
that we are telling the filter that the measurements are
very informative.
What happens now is that the filter will
trust the measurements too much, and we will not
have a very car-like filter trajectory
due to that measurement noise will be transferred
to the state estimates.
So if we instead have a good balance between process
and measurement noise, the filter
will produce estimates that are both behaving like we expect
a car to behave and adapting according
to what the measurements indicate, like this.
So to summarize filter tuning, a key aspect in tuning
is to select the ratio between the process noise
and the measurement noise.
This ratio is sometimes called the Signal-to-Noise Ratio,
or SNR.
As we saw in the toy example, if the SNR is high, that is
that we have less measurement noise than process noise,
we will have a quickly adapting filter
that relies more on new data than the predictions.
And if on the other hand, SNR is low,
that is we have more measurement noise than process noise,
the filter will perceive the data to be noisy
and that we rely more on the predictions.
And as we saw in the toy example,
the filter will react slowly to new data.
And as we mentioned, typically we
can get a good idea of what the measurement noise R should
be either from the manufacturer or by making
controlled experiments where we collect
data in simple scenarios from which we can estimate R.
By fixing the measurement noise, a motion or a process noise,
Q, can be selected by tuning.
And lastly, unless you know the state sequence,
you can study the properties on the innovation to guide you
in tuning the filter.
And we end with a self-assessment question
related to these noise covariances.
