
Throughout this course, we will formulate our filtering
prediction and smoothing problems using so-called state
space models.
We will use these statistical models to describe
what we're interested in--
we call this our state vector--
how the state vector evolves over time,
and how it relates to the observations that we make.
We will in a later lecture show how
we can use these models to solve the general filtering problem.
So in this lecture, we will look at how we define these models,
and what's their purpose when it comes to solving our estimation
problems.
We will focus our attention on discrete time state space
models, as it's often enough to estimate our state
with a certain time interval.
So discrete time state space model models a so-called state
vector, which we denote xk and a measurement vector,
which we denote yk where k here is a discrete time
index, in both cases.
First, we have a motion or process model,
which in its most general form describes the current state,
xk, as a function, fk minus 1, of the previous state,
xk minus 1, and a motion noise process, qk minus 1.
The purpose of this model is to statistically describe how
the state evolves over time.
Secondly, we have a measurement or a sensor model,
which, again, in this most general form,
describes the current measurement yk
as a function hk of the current state, xk, and a measurement
noise process, rk.
The purpose here is to statistically describe
how we can relate the current state to our observation, yk.
Additionally, in our discrete time state space model,
we also have a prior distribution of our state.
This is the distribution of our state at time 0
before we make any observation.
With this model, we can describe any general knowledge
that we have about our state vector
before we even make any observations.
So these are the basic building blocks of a discrete time state
space model, and I'm sure that you
have come across this type of model in other courses
that you have studied, for example, in control theory.
What we typically also assume, which
is not evident from what we see here,
is that both the motion noise, qk minus 1,
and the measurement noise, rk, are
independent of all other noise vectors.
This means that they are not only
independent from each other but also independent over time.
So the measurement noise at time k
is independent from the measurement noise
at time k minus 1, for example.
And these assumptions also ensures
that the Markov property holds for the state space model.
All right, so let's look into more detail regarding
the motion and measurement models.
We start with a motion or process model.
I should mention that, throughout the course,
I will probably use both of these terms interchangeably.
The term process model stems from control theory
where one, in general, wants to control some process.
And then one needs a model for the dynamics
of this process, which is then called a process model.
In terms of, for example, estimating the position
of a vehicle, the process model, in this case,
should then describe the dynamics of the vehicle,
and thus the process model will describe
the motion of the vehicle.
The more descriptive name, in this case,
is to call the process model for what it is,
and that's a motion model.
So in sum, the system dynamics is described by this model
here, which we refer to as a motion or a process model.
There are a couple of things that
are interesting to note here.
Firstly, the motion model describes the state evolution,
and an equivalent view of this is
that it describes the distribution
of the current state condition on the previous state.
Often, when we talk about the motion model,
we have both of these representations in mind--
both the equation form here and the density form here.
They are equivalent views of the motion or process model.

With this interpretation here, we
assume that we have perfect knowledge about where the state
was one time instance ago.
That is, we have no uncertainty about this.
What the motion model then describes
is the distribution of xk conditioned
on the previous state.
So what are probable states in the next time instance?
As such, the motion model allows us to connect states over time
and help us rule out unreasonable trajectories.
That is if we want to estimate the position of an object
over time we typically have physical constraints that
limits the movements of this object over time

So if we assume that we are tracking, the motion of some
object over time.
We often want this trajectory to look fairly smooth
due to physical constraints.
Often, something like this, and not something like this.

And we use the motion model to rule out these unreasonable
trajectories.
So let us look at this from the perspective of an example.
So if the state at time k minus 1, for example,
describes the position and velocity of a vehicle.
So it describes the position and velocity of this vehicle.
So knowing this, the aim of the motion model
is to describe the state at time k
or the distribution of the state at time k.
In this case, it seems reasonable to assume
that the vehicle continues to move
as it did at time k minus 1, which would give us
a state something like this.
However, we cannot rule out that the vehicle doesn't make any
changes to its velocity vector by, for example,
turning the steering wheel, stepping on the brake,
or pushing the accelerator pedal.
This would mean that we need to allow for the predictions
to look something like this.
If for example, the vehicle has turned somewhat.
But we still need these deviations
to be reasonable and not as we see in this example here.
So it's unreasonable that a vehicle which
has a velocity like this would, in a short time instance,
have a position and velocity like this.
And this is unreasonable both form a vehicle dynamics
perspective and also from the kind of changes
that one can expect the driver to make.
So the motion model considers two aspects.
The dynamics of the system, which is usually
described using physical models and the uncertainty
regarding what can change between two time instances.
And how much changes we allow is modeled by the motion noise
process, qk minus 1.
These two aspects together make up all statistical model
probable state at the current time, given the state
at the previous time instance.
And in this case, we could get some distribution
looking like this.

So states in this region are probable.
States outside this region are improbable.
And this is an illustration of the motion model.

And with this motion model, these types of states
here would be very improbable.
The other piece of the puzzle is what's
called the measurement model, which
describe how the measurement relates
to the state vector using this equation here.
Also in this case, we have two names
that we use interchangeably.
We call it the measurement model or the sensor model.
We should note that, as with the motion model,
the measurement model has an equivalent probabilistic
interpretation as it describes the distribution of yk
given our state, xk, so p of yk given xk.
And we recognize this distribution
here as our likelihood function.
So the measurement model actually
defines the likelihood function in our estimation problem.
As such, when we talk about the measurement model,
we sometimes mean the likelihood function,
as they are equivalent.
As with the motion model, we have
an equivalent probabilistic representation
of this equation.
The other thing that we should note
is that we use the measurement model to relate data
to our state vector, and it helps
us to use data to learn more about our states.
And in most cases, we cannot observe the state directly.
And even if it could, our measurements
are then corrupted by measurement noise.
So let us look at this from an example
where we have a host vehicle that
is equipped with some sensor.
Let's say a radar in front of the vehicle, which
has this field of view here.
This radar will give us noisy observations of this vehicle
here that we are interested in positioning.
So in this case, our state vector, xk,
represents the position of this vehicle,
and yk then represents the radar returns
that we get from this vehicle.
One way to view this measurement model here, or here,
is to view it as a generative model that we, in this case,
can use to simulate radar returns, from this vehicle
here.
If we design our measurement model,
hk, accurately, we should then be
able to simulate radar returns from the vehicle, which
both describes where on the vehicle
we expect the radar returns to end up
as well as the statistical fluctuations in the returns,
which are influenced by our measurement noise process, rk.
If we use our measurement model to generate
independent samples of yk, it could look something like this:
And ideally, if the measurement model is accurate,
if we were to collect data from a radar that
is viewing the vehicle like this,
we will get something similar.
However, we should bear in mind that these are just models,
and we will never fully cover all aspects of reality.
What we aim for is to cover the more important aspects that
also affects our filtering results.
There is also a slightly different variant
of our time discrete state space model
where we include a known input signal, uk.
As the signal is assumed to be known,
we treat it as a deterministic variable in our models.
So we simply add it in our equations
here as a time-varying parameter in our models.
For the density representations, it
is common that we write it like this with a semicolon
here to indicate that uk is not a stochiastic variable,
but we should rather view it as a time-dependent parameter
in our models.
It is common to use this type of input signal
to include control input signals into our models,
but it may also be used to include accurate measurements
directly into our models.
For example, if we have an accurate accelerometer
with negligible noise, it would perhaps be a better idea
to include it directly in our process model
through this known input signal, uk,
than it would be to use it as a measurement.
And the reason is that if we use it in our motion model,
we can then hopefully get better predictions here,
which would help us to describe the measurements with less
uncertainty.
Here is a self-assessment question
related to the use of the motion and the measurement model.
