
A common strategy in order to come up with a discrete time
motion model is to first design a continuous time motion model,
and then discretize that one.
In this video we will present two useful results
that will enable us to discretize continuous time
motion models.
We will look at both an approximative method
and an exact method for an important model family.
So what do we want to do?
Well, we will assume that we are given a continuous-time motion
model, expressed here in terms of a differential equation,
where we'll have the time derivative of our state
sequence equal to this expression here,
where we have some function, a tilde,
of our state sequence, plus some additive noise.
So for a two dimension model, our time-continuous motion
model could look something like this,
where we describe our motion as a time continuous function.
Now, what we would like to do is to find
the discrete-time counterpart to this time continuous model,
which we then write like this, where xk here
is our discrete time sequence.
The key thing to note here is that our discrete time sequence
contains samples from our continuous time sequence.
So we sample our continuous time sequence
at time 0 capital T, 2, capital T, 3 capital T, and so on.
And those samples become our discrete time sequence,
where k here denotes our discrete time index,
and capital T is our sampling interval.
So if we go back to our example here,
we construct our discrete time model
by sampling this continuous time model here
at time 0, capital T, 2T, 3T, and so on.
And what we get is this discrete time model expressing our state
at discrete time instances, k equal to 0, 1, 2, and so on.
The idea and our objective here is
to come up with a good motion model expressed
in terms of these samples.
So one way to do this is to express the distribution of x
at time t plus capital T, given the continuous time
sequence at time t.
The reason we would like to express this distribution
is because it is the same as expressing the distribution
of xk given xk minus 1.
So we can think of this here as representing
xk and this here as representing xk minus 1.
And the distribution of xk, given xk minus 1,
we know this to be our discrete time motion
model, which is then related to this distribution here.
Now, we will do this for a variety
of different type of continuous time motion models
in later lectures.
However, the focus of this lecture
is to introduce two important results that
will be useful for us when we derive our discrete models
in the next couple of videos.
The first result is the Euler discretization method,
which is an approximative method that is quite simple to use.
The second result is an analytical solution
of linear and time invariant state space models,
which gives us an exact expression.
Let us first look at the Euler method.
Suppose we have a differential equation on this form, which
means that on the left hand side here
we have the time derivative of our state sequence,
such that the differential equation describes
how the state sequence varies over time.
Now, note that a tilde here could be a nonlinear function.
Now, the Euler method is a quite simple method
to approximate the solution of the differential equation here.
The idea is to use this approximation of the derivative
of the state sequence, where the time derivative is approximated
as the time difference divided by the interval.
So we have x of t plus capital T minus x of t,
divided by capital T. So if capital T is very small,
then this is a good approximation.
And if capital T is large, then this
is usually not so accurate.
If we look at this, we're interested in finding
x of t plus capital T. And we can now
do that in terms of x of t and x dot of t using this expression.
So to start, we can rewrite question two
here such that it expresses x of t
plus capital T as approximately equal to x of t plus capital T
times x dot of t.
So we get this by multiplying both sides with capital T
and then moving x of t to this side of the equation.
Now, I think the result here is quite intuitive.
So it tells us that we can take a previous state,
and then we add T times the time derivative of the state
at that time instance.
So the rate of which it's changing at the previous time
instance.
And then we get the state at the next time instance.
Now, if we insert this expression for the time
derivative here, we get this final expression,
expressed only in terms of the state at time t
and the noise at time t.
So a nice property with this solution
is that we can almost always find
an approximate discrete model using this method.
Also, in those occasions when the original differential
equation is nonlinear, and possibly intractable
to solve exactly.
So using this technique at least we get one
approximated model that we can use also
in the time discrete domain.
To get a more hands on feeling for Euler's method,
here's a simple scalar example.
In this case, x dot of T, which is
a time derivative of x, is just x of T. And at time 0,
it starts at 1.
Now, the task here is to figure out what x of 1 is.
So time 1.
So we can see that the time derivative of x
is equal to x of T. And at time 0, this is 1.
According to Euler's method then x of 1 is equal to x of 0,
plus capital T, which is 1 in this case,
times the time derivative at 0, which is 1.
So we have x of 0, which is 1.
So we get 1 plus 1, which is 2.
So what the Euler method basically says
is that the time derivative is constantly
1 over the whole trajectory.
So we get this linear trajectory here.
So we start at 1, and we end up at 2.
And x of T changes linearly between these two points.
However, according to the time-continuous model,
the time derivative changes with x of t.
So it grows with x of t.
Now, if we solve this differential equation exactly,
we get this curve here, where x of t grows exponentially,
and we end up at 2.7, which is e to the power of 1.
So, in general, if the time interval is relatively small,
the Euler method is reasonably accurate.
But if the time interval grows, the accuracy
gets worse, and worse, and worse,
and it does so rather quickly.
The second result we want to present in this video
is the analytical solution to x of t
plus capital T when we have a linear system.
Suppose x dot of T is equal to a constant matrix a times x of t,
plus a constant vector b, then we can find x of t
plus capital T analytically using
a sequence of small steps.
The first step is to move A times
x of t to this side of the equation,
such that we collect the state vector at the same side
of the equation.
The second step is actually the tricky one.
And that's to identify an integrating factor.
We do this by noting that if we have
a product of A to the power of minus AT, times x of T, then
the derivative gets two terms, one where we have x dot
of T times the integrating factor,
and one where we have x of T times A
times the integrating factor.
The minus sign here comes from that we have a minus sign here.
As you can see, we have one term with x dot of T,
and one term with A times x of T.
And they are both multiplied by e to the power of minus AT.
Based on this remark, the idea is
that we would like to multiply both sides
of this expression with e to the power of minus AT.
What we get is this expression, where on the left hand side
we realize that this is the time derivative of e
to the power of minus AT times x of T.
The good thing about this is that it's
easy to compute a time integral of a time derivative.
It's just to evaluate the function at the end
point of the integral.
On the right hand side, we had b before.
So now we have e to the power of minus AT times b.
So what do we do next?
Well, we integrate.
Right?
We have a time derivative here.
So we could integrate both sides from t
to t plus capital T. So on the left hand side here,
we just get the end points of this function here.
So that is this function evaluated at t plus capital
T, which is what we get here, and then
evaluated at t, which is what we get here.
On the right hand side, we get the integral of this function,
from t to t plus capital T. So it's an integral of e
to the power minus A tau times our constant vector B d tau.
We should recall that we are actually
interested in finding x of t plus capital T.
But we can do this by moving this term to the other side,
and then multiplying both sides with e
to the power of A times t plus capital T.
If we do that, we get x of t plus capital T on the left hand
side, which is what we wanted.
On the other side we get e to the power of A times capital
T times x of t, because this term here cancels out
when we multiply by this.
And we only get this term left.
Right?
The final term is not entirely obvious.
But it's an integral here that we have multiplied with e
to the power of A times t plus capital T,
and that we've changed the limits of the integration a bit
in order to get this expression here.
However, this is already a nice expression.
And it turns out that we can actually solve
this integral analytically.
So this is what we found.
The continuous state at time t plus capital T
is the previous state at time t, multiplied by e
to the power of A times capital T,
plus this integral here, which is multiplied by this vector b.
Now, the question that we need to answer
is, what is this integral here?
If you think about it, the definition of the Taylor series
expansion.
So it's I plus A times t plus A squared times t squared,
divided by 2, plus Aq times tq, divided by 3 factorial,
and so on.
If we would like to integrate this,
we can instead take the integral of the right hand side.
And each term here is the easier to take the integral of.
So if we integrate from 0 to capital T,
this is just I times capital T, plus A times capital T
squared divided by 2, plus A squared times
capital T cubed, divided by 3 factorial, and so on.
So here is an analytical solution to this integral.
To conclude, we found an analytical solution
for the linear system.
That is, we assume that x dot of t is
equal to some constant matrix A times x of t plus b.
And if we solve this differential equation
and discretize it, we found an expression
for x of t plus capital T like this.

We end with a self-assessment question for you
to think about.
