
In the previous video, we considered
how to discretize a continuous time motion model
and how to select a discrete time transition matrix.
In this video, we'll instead focus
on how to select a discrete time motion noise
and in particular its covariance matrix.
Suppose that a continuous time motion
model is described by a linear differential equation
such that the time derivative of the state
is a linear function of the state plus some process noise.
Now, from the previous video, we know
how to discretize the deterministic part of this
by, preferably, finding the exact solution
to the differential equation.
So, in this video, we'll focus on the noise term here,
which we haven't discussed that much previously.
Now, a very popular and common assumption
regarding q tilde of t is that it's a white Gaussian noise
process, which means that it has 0 mean
and that it's uncorrelated over time.
So uncorrelated over time means that if you
take the cross-covariance between q
tilde at different time instances--
so tau 1 is not equal to tau 2.
This cross-covariance will be 0.
However, if we take the covariance of q tilde
at the same time, so tau 1 is equal to tau 2,
we get something infinite here.
Because at the cross-covariance it's
assumed to be an impulse function in time.
This might look a bit complicated,
but it turns out that we're, generally,
not interested in the covariance of q tilde at a specific time.
Instead, for instance, when we want
to find a corresponding discrete time covariance
matrix that we will look at later,
we always encounter q tilde in an integral.
And it turns out that when we consider
an integral of q tilde, this is actually not that complicated.
Now, in order to get at least some understanding
of the properties of such an integral,
let's look at the famous Wiener process.
The Wiener process is just that.
It's an integral of this type of noise
where the integral is taken from 0 to time t.
Now, if we look at what the Wiener process is--
as you know, an integral-- it's just a type of summation.
So as we increase t here, we just
summing more and more Gaussian random variables together.
Now, this is actually analogous to how
we generate a random walk.
And can see the Wiener process as the limit of a random walk
as we let the sample time go to zero.
So if we look at the properties of the Wiener process,
it's easy to see that it's 0 mean,
as it's just a summation of 0 mean random variables.
So it has to be 0 mean.
Now, the covariance is simply the expected value
of w t times w t transpose.
And if we plug-in the integral expression for w t,
we get this expression here.
We can think of this as--
this is a summation of Gaussian random variables,
and this is a summation of Gaussian random variables.
And whenever tau 1 and tau 2 are different,
the covariance is going to be 0 because of this property here.
And we can make use of this.
Now, an expectation is also a type of integral,
so can switch to orders of the integrals.
So we move these integrals outside and then
the expectation inside.
Then we get the expectation of q tilde tau 1 times
q tilde tau 2 transpose.
And this is, by definition, the cross-covariance here.
So this here is the impulse function times q tilde.
Now, this is actually convenient that this is an impulse
function because impulse functions are
easy to integrate.
So if we integrate this over tau 2,
we simply get 1 due to this impulse function here.
And if we integrate this from 0 to t,
we simply get t times q tilde.
So the covariance of a Wiener process
grows linearly with time, which is perhaps unsurprising
as we keep adding more and more independent Gaussian
random variables.
Now, what I would like you to remember from this introduction
is that q tilde is a time continuous white
Gaussian process, which means that it's
0 mean and uncorrelated over time.
And even though the cross-covariance
is an impulse function, when we compute the integrals here,
we get something which is finite.
Additionally, we saw that the covariance of this type
of integral is easy to compute.
Now, we will use this when we, again,
look at this linear, continuous time differential equation
with the noise term here is this white Gaussian noise process.
What we seek is the corresponding discrete time
motion model that we would write on this form here.
Now, as the continuous time motion model is linear,
then the discrete time motion model will also be linear.
And at the continuous time motion
noise process is additive white Gaussian,
it's reasonable to assume that also the discrete time
noise is additive and Gaussian.
However, it's not clear how to select a covariance capital Q k
1.
So the focus of this video is to find a method
to do that, which works for any linear, continuous time
differential equation and, if possible,
also some of the nonlinear differential
equations that we might have.
We should note that Q k minus 1 is
the covariance of the discrete time process noise Q k minus 1.
But we can also view it as a covariance
of x k given x k minus 1.
If we know x k minus 1, then the only uncertainty
that we have left here is concerning Q k minus 1.
Similarly, we interpret this as covariance of x of t
plus capital T given x of t in the continuous time model.
We will now introduce two methods
to select the motion noise covariance in the discrete time
motion model.
In the first method that we will present here,
we would like to make use of the exact solution
for linear systems.
So here we have a linear differential equation
describing the continuous time motion.
And if we solve for x of t plus capital T,
we get the following expression.
Now, to be honest, the previous derivation that we did we
assumed that q tilde was a constant vector, which
we called b, if you remember.
However, it's easy to show that this is the actual solution
for this system.
So if we identify our discrete time model, we have x of t
plus capital T, which is x k equal to--
we know this to be our transition matrix a k minus 1
and x t is x k minus 1--
so this integral here has to be our additive noise process Q
k minus 1.

So with this term here we want to capture
the parts of our model that does not depend on x of t.
So Q k minus 1 is supposed to represent
this integral of our time continuous noise process
over our sample interval and weighted
with this matrix function here.
Now, when we integrate the noise,
this matrix here will determine how
the noise will spread out in the different state dimensions.
We can look at this by calculating the discrete time
noise covariance, that is the covariance matrix of Q
k minus 1.
We can do this in a similar manner
as we did for the Wiener process.
So we can write the covariance of Q k minus 1
as capital Q k minus 1.
And we can express this as the covariance of x of t
plus capital T when we know x of t.
This covariance here is the covariance of this part
here, because x of t is known.
And the covariance of that can be expressed like this.
Now, this covariance can be expressed like the expectation
of this times this transpose.
And if we do similar trick as we did before when we changed
the order of the integration and expectation,
we get this result here where we have
an integral from 0 to capital T of the exponential function
of A tilde times tau times q tilde
times this exponential function transpose.
We can interpret this as the continuous time noise
covariance, gets mixed by these matrix functions,
and integrated over the whole sample interval.
Now, this may look a bit complicated, but in many cases
this is actually not too hard to handle.
For instance, the elements of these matrices
are often polynomials in tau of quite low order.
And then we can take the product of these three
and compute the integrals of each element
in the corresponding matrix.
The second technique to select a covariance of the discrete time
motion noise is something that I refer to as the modified Euler
method.
It is essentially the same as the Euler method,
but the noise is handled in a slightly more
elaborate fashion.
In this case, we consider a general, nonlinear differential
equation where a tilde here is possibly
a nonlinear function of x of t.
But it could, of course, also be linear as well.
We can view the Euler method as this approximation.
So x dot of tau is approximately a tilde of x of t
plus q tilde of t for all tau within the sampling interval.
This means that we approximate the time derivative
of x as constant in the complete interval that we are interested
in.
This assumption greatly simplifies
our problem, and the calculation of x of t plus capital T,
and gives the following expression.
Since the time derivative is assumed to be constant,
the prediction of x of t plus capital T
is simply the previous state, x of t,
plus t times the time derivative of x
at the start of the interval at time t.
Now, for the modified Euler method,
we use the same approximation for the difficult part,
so that is a nonlinear function of x of t,
but we use the actual expression for the noise term since
that's-- anyway-- turns out to be quite simple to handle.
If you look at the expression now, we get x of t plus capital
T equal to x of t plus this integral here from t to t
plus capital T of the time derivative of x of t.
Now this relation holds for any nonlinear or linear system.
Now, as x dot is approximated to be constant here,
when we integrate over the interval
over this constant vector we just
get the interval times this constant vector as a result.
So there is no difference yet as we are still
using the Euler approximation for this component here.
Now, here, however, for the noise term
we get an integral over q tilde from t to t
plus capital T compared to just t times a constant q tilde of t
that we got in the ordinary Euler method.
So, given this, how should we then
select the covariance matrix of the discrete time motion noise?
To answer the question, we compute
the covariance of x of t plus capital T given x of t.
Now, if x of t is known, both of these terms
here are deterministic and we only get a contribution
from the noise term.
Now, we actually looked at an integral equivalent to this
when we looked at the covariance of the Wiener process
in the beginning.
And then we concluded that the covariance of this
grows linearly with the length of the time interval.
So according to the modified Euler method,
we should select the discrete time noise
as capital T times q tilde where q tilde is
the covariance of the continuous time noise process.
To summarize what we've learned so far,
we have proposed two methods for selecting noise covariance.
The first method is the sine for linear continuous time systems.
And here we select a discrete time covariance
by solving this integral here.
In the second method, that we refer to as the modified Euler
method, we obtain Q k minus 1 by simply
multiplying the continuous time covariance q
tilde with capital T.
To make this presentation a bit more concrete,
let's consider how to select a discrete time motion noise
in a constant velocity model.
In the continuous time version of the constant velocity model,
as we mentioned in the previous video,
we assume that there's only noise in the velocity
component of the state vector and that the noise
in the position is obtained by integrating the velocity noise.
Now, it's actually quite common that the motion noise is 0
in some of the state variables.
So, generally, we can use a matrix gamma
when we express the motion noise q tilde equal to gamma q c of t
where q c is a low-dimensional vector that
describes a noise in the dimensions where the noise is
non-zero.
In the example with the constant velocity model
Q c would be the noise and the velocity component
since q tilde of t is a linear transformed version of Q c
of t.
The corresponding covariance matrix, capital Q tilde,
is related like this.
So capital Q tilde is equal to gamma times capital Q c times
gamma transpose, where capital Q c is a covariance of Q c of t.
By making use of this type of representation,
we can express the continuous time constant velocity
model like this.
As you see, the time derivative of the position
is the velocity plus 0 noise.
And the time derivative of the velocity is Q c of t.
So Q c of t is the noise in the velocity component.
To obtain the complete noise covariance,
capital Q tilde, we evaluate the product gamma, which
is a 0, 1 column vector, times Q c times gamma transpose, which
is the 0, 1 row vector.
What we then get is this 2 by 2 matrix that only contains 0s,
except in this element--
we'll get capital Q c.
To close the video we have included
two self-assessment questions, where
you will apply the above methods to select the noise
covariance in a discrete time constant velocity model.

[CAMERA SHUTTER CLICKS]
